Holy Bible New International Version



About the New International Version – The New International Version was
undertaken by an independent committee in after a general consensus that there
was a need for a new, contemporary English translation of the Bible.
With the help of scholars from all over the world, and multiple reviews from a
committee of multiple denominations, the New International Version has earned
the widespread respect of all Christians as one of the best translations
available.

http://GODoor.net


Old Testament Genesis Exodus Leviticus Numbers Deuteronomy Joshua Judges Ruth
1st Samuel 2nd Samuel 1st Kings 2nd Kings 1st Chronicles 2nd Chronicles Ezra
Nehemiah Esther Job Psalms Proverbs Ecclesiastes Song of Solomon Isaiah Jeremiah
Lamentations Ezekiel Daniel Hosea Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah Micah Nahum Habakkuk
Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi


New Testament Matthew Mark Luke John Acts Romans 1st Corinthians 2nd Corinthians
Galatians Ephesians Philippians Colossians 1st Thessalonians 2nd Thessalonians
1st Timothy 2nd Timothy Titus Philemon Hebrews James 1st Peter 2nd Peter 1st
John 2nd John 3rd John Jude Revelation


Genesis


1In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.
2 Now the earth was formless and empty, darkness was over the surface of the
deep, and the Spirit of God was hovering over the waters.
3 And God said, "Let there be light," and there was light. 4
God saw that the light was good, and he separated the light from the darkness.
5
God called the light "day," and the darkness he called "night." And there was
evening, and there was morning-
the first day. 6
And God said, "Let there be an expanse between the waters to separate water from
water."
7
So God made the expanse and separated the water under the expanse from the water
above it. And it was so.
8
God called the expanse "sky." And there was evening, and there was morning-the
second day. 9 And God said, "Let the water under the sky be gathered to one
place, and let dry ground appear." And it was so.


10 God called the dry ground "land," and the gathered waters he called "seas."
And God saw that it was good. 11 Then God said, "Let the land produce
vegetation: seed-bearing plants and trees on the land that bear fruit with seed
in it, according to their various kinds." And it was so.
12 The land produced vegetation: plants bearing seed according to their kinds
and trees bearing fruit with seed in it
according to their kinds. And God saw that it was good.
13
And there was evening, and there was morning-the third day.
14 And God said, "Let there be lights in the expanse of the sky to separate the
day from the night, and let them serve as signs to mark seasons and days and
years,
15
and let them be lights in the expanse of the sky to give light on the earth."
And it was so.
16
God made two great lights-the greater light to govern the day and the lesser
light to govern the night. He also made the stars. 17 God set them in the
expanse of the sky to give light on the earth,
18 to govern the day and the night, and to separate light from darkness. And God
saw that it was good.


19 And there was evening, and there was morning-the fourth day.
20 And God said, "Let the water teem
with living creatures, and let birds fly above the earth across the expanse of
the sky."
21 So God created the great creatures of the sea and every living and moving
thing with which the water teems,
according to their kinds, and every winged bird according to its kind. And God
saw that it was good.
22 God blessed them and said, "Be
fruitful and increase in number and fill the water in the seas, and let the
birds increase on the earth."
23 And there was evening, and there was morning-the fifth day.

24 And God said, "Let the land produce living creatures according to their
kinds: livestock, creatures that move along the ground, and wild animals, each
according to its kind." And it was so.
25
God made the wild animals according to their kinds, the livestock according to
their kinds, and all the creatures that
move along the ground according to their kinds. And God saw that it was good.
26 Then God said, "Let us make man in our image, in our likeness, and let them
rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air, over the livestock, over
all the earth, and over all the creatures that move along the ground."


27 So God created man in his own image, in the image of God he created him; male
and female he created them.

28 God blessed them and said to them, "Be fruitful and increase in number; fill
the earth and subdue it. Rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air
and over every living creature that moves on the ground."
29 Then God said, "I give you every seed- bearing plant on the face of the whole
earth and every tree that has fruit with seed in it. They will be yours for
food.

30 And to all the beasts of the earth and all the birds of the air and all the
creatures that move on the ground- everything that has the breath of life in
it-I give every green plant for food." And it was so.
31
God saw all that he had made, and it was very good. And there was evening, and
there was morning-the sixth day.



2Thus the heavens and the earth were completed in all their vast array.
2 By the seventh day God had finished the work he had been doing; so on the
seventh day he rested from all his work.
3 And God blessed the seventh day and made it holy, because on it he rested from
all the work of creating that he had done.
4 This is the account of the heavens and the earth when they were created.


When the Lord God made the earth and the heavens-
5 and no shrub of the field had yet appeared on the earth and no plant of
the field had yet sprung up, for the Lord God had not sent rain on the earth and
there was no man to work the ground,
6 but streams came up from the earth and watered the whole surface of the
ground-
7 the Lord God formed the man from the dust of the ground and breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living being.

8 Now the Lord God had planted a garden in the east, in Eden; and there he put
the man he had formed.

9 And the Lord God made all kinds of trees grow out of the ground-trees that
were pleasing to the eye and good for food. In the middle of the garden were the
tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.

10 A river watering the garden flowed from Eden; from there it was separated
into four headwaters.
11 The name of the first is the Pishon; it winds through the entire land of
Havilah, where there is gold.
12 (The gold of that land is good;
aromatic resin and onyx are also there.)
13 The name of the second river is the Gihon; it winds through the entire land
of Cush.


14 The name of the third river is the Tigris; it runs along the east side of
Asshur. And the fourth river is the
Euphrates.
15 The Lord God took the man and put him in the Garden of Eden to work it and
take care of it.
16 And the Lord God commanded the man, "You are free to eat from any tree in the
garden;
17 but you must not eat from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, for
when you eat of it you will surely die."
18 The Lord God said, "It is not good for
the man to be alone. I will make a helper suitable for him."
19 Now the Lord God had formed out of
the ground all the beasts of the field and all the birds of the air. He brought
them to the man to see what he would name them; and whatever the man called each
living creature, that was its name.
20 So the man gave names to all the
livestock, the birds of the air and all the beasts of the field. But for Adam no
suitable helper was found.
21 So the Lord God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep; and while he was
sleeping, he took one of the man's ribs and closed up the place with flesh.

22 Then the Lord God made a woman from the rib he had taken out of the man,
and he brought her to the man.


23 The man said, "This is now bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; she shall
be called 'woman, ' for she was taken out of man."
24 For this reason a man will leave his
father and mother and be united to his wife, and they will become one flesh.
25 The man and his wife were both naked, and they felt no shame.


3Now the serpent was more crafty than any of the wild animals the Lord God had
made. He said to the woman, "Did God really say, 'You must not eat from any tree
in the garden'?"

2 The woman said to the serpent, "We may eat fruit from the trees in the garden,
3 but God did say, 'You must not eat fruit from the tree that is in the middle
of th garden, and you must not touch it, or you will die.' "

4 "You will not surely die," the serpent said to the woman.
5 "For God knows that when you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will
be like God, knowing good and evil."
6 When the woman saw that the fruit of the tree was good for food and pleasing
to the eye, and also desirable for gaining wisdom, she took some and ate it. She
also gave some to her husband, who was with her, and he ate it.


7 Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they realized they were naked;
so they sewed fig leaves together and made coverings for themselves.

8 Then the man and his wife heard the sound of the Lord God as he was walking in
the garden in the cool of the
day, and they hid from the Lord God among the trees of the garden.
9 But the Lord God called to the man, "Where are you?" 10 He answered, "I heard
you in the garden, and I was afraid because I was naked; so I hid."
11
And he said, "Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten from the tree
that I commanded you not to eat from?"
12 e The man said, "The woman you put here with me-she gave me some fruit from
the tree, and I ate it."
13
Then the Lord God said to the woman, "What is this you have done?" The woman
said, "The serpent deceived me, and I ate."
14 So the Lord God said to the serpent, "Because you have done this, "Cursed are
you above all the livestock and all the wild animals! You will crawl on your
belly and you will eat dust all the days of your life.
15 And I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring


and hers; he will crush your head, and you will strike his heel."
16 To the woman he said, "I will greatly increase your pains in childbearing;
with pain you will give birth to children. Your desire will be for your husband,
and he will rule over you." 17
To Adam he said, "Because you listened to your wife and ate from the tree about
which I commanded you, 'You must not eat of it,' "Cursed is the
ground because of you; through painful toil you will eat of it all the days of
your life.
18 It will produce thorns and thistles for you, and you will eat the plants of
the field.
19 By the sweat of your brow you will eat your food until you return to the
ground, since from it you were taken; for dust you are and to dust you will
return."
20 Adam named his wife Eve, because she would become the mother of all the
living.
21 The Lord God made garments of skin for Adam and his wife and clothed them.
22 And the Lord God said, "The man has now become like one of us, knowing good
and evil. He must not be allowed to reach out his hand and take also from the
tree of life and eat, and live forever."
23 So the Lord God banished him from the Garden of Eden to work the ground from
which he had been taken.


24 After he drove the man out, he placed on the east side of the Garden of Eden
cherubim and a flaming sword flashing
back and forth to guard the way to the tree of life.

4Adam lay with his wife Eve, and she
became pregnant and gave birth to Cain. She said, "With the help of the Lord I
have brought forth a man."
2 Later she gave birth to his brother Abel. Now Abel kept flocks, and Cain
worked the soil.
3 In the course of time Cain brought some of the fruits of the soil as an
offering to the Lord .
4 But Abel brought fat portions from some of the firstborn of his flock. The
Lord looked with favor on Abel and his offering,
5 but on Cain and his offering he did not look with favor. So Cain was very
angry, and his face was downcast.
6 Then the Lord said to Cain, "Why are you angry? Why is your face downcast?
7 If you do what is right, will you not be accepted? But if you do not do what
is right, sin is crouching at your door; it desires to have you, but you must
master it."
8 Now Cain said to his brother Abel, "Let's go out to the field." And while they
were in the field, Cain attacked his brother Abel and killed him.


9 Then the Lord said to Cain, "Where is your brother Abel?" "I don't know," he
replied. "Am I my brother's keeper?"

10 The Lord said, "What have you done? Listen! Your brother's blood cries out to
me from the ground.

11 Now you are under a curse and driven from the ground, which opened its mouth
to receive your brother's blood
from your hand.
12 When you work the ground, it will no longer yield its crops for you. You will
b
a restless wanderer on the earth."
13 Cain said to the Lord , "My punishment is more than I can bear.

14 Today you are driving me from the land, and I will be hidden from your
presence; I will be a restless wanderer on the earth, and whoever finds me will
kill me."

15 But the Lord said to him, "Not so ; if anyone kills Cain, he will suffer
vengeance seven times over." Then the
Lord put a mark on Cain so that no one who found him would kill him.
16 So Cain went out from the Lord 's presence and lived in the land of Nod, east
of Eden.

17 Cain lay with his wife, and she became pregnant and gave birth to Enoch. Cain
was then building a city, and he named it after his son Enoch. 18 To Enoch was
born Irad, and Irad was the father of Mehujael, and Mehujael


was the father of Methushael, and Methushael was the father of Lamech.
19 Lamech married two women, one
named Adah and the other Zillah.
20 Adah gave birth to Jabal; he was the father of those who live in tents and
raise livestock.
21 His brother's name was Jubal; he was the father of all who play the harp and
flute.

e 22 Zillah also had a son, Tubal-Cain, who forged all kinds of tools out of
bronze and iron. Tubal-Cain's sister was
Naamah.
23 Lamech said to his wives, "Adah and
Zillah, listen to me; wives of Lamech, hear my words. I have killed a man for
wounding me, a young man for injuring me.
24 If Cain is avenged seven times, then
Lamech seventy-seven times."
25 Adam lay with his wife again, and she gave birth to a son and named him Seth,
saying, "God has granted me another child in place of Abel, since Cain killed
him."
26 Seth also had a son, and he named him Enosh. At that time men began to
call on the name of the Lord .

5This is the written account of Adam's line. When God created man, he made him
in the likeness of God.


2 He created them male and female and blessed them. And when they were created,
he called them "man. "

3 When Adam had lived 130 years, he had a son in his own likeness, in his own
image; and he named him Seth.

4 After Seth was born, Adam lived 800 years and had other sons and daughters.

5 Altogether, Adam lived 930 years, and then he died.

6 When Seth had lived 105 years, he became the father of Enosh.

7 And after he became the father of Enosh, Seth lived 807 years and had other
sons and daughters.

8 Altogether, Seth lived 912 years, and then he died.

9 When Enosh had lived 90 years, he became the father of Kenan.

10 And after he became the father of Kenan, Enosh lived 815 years and had other
sons and daughters.
11 Altogether, Enosh lived 905 years, and then he died.

12 When Kenan had lived 70 years, he became the father of Mahalalel.

13 And after he became the father of Mahalalel, Kenan lived 840 years and had
other sons and daughters.


14 Altogether, Kenan lived 910 years, and then he died.
15 When Mahalalel had lived 65 years, he
became the father of Jared.
16 And after he became the father of Jared, Mahalalel lived 830 years and
had other sons and daughters.
17 Altogether, Mahalalel lived 895 years,
and then he died.
18 When Jared had lived 162 years, he
became the father of Enoch.
19 And after he became the father of
Enoch, Jared lived 800 years and had other sons and daughters.
20 Altogether, Jared lived 962 years, and
then he died.
21 When Enoch had lived 65 years, he
became the father of Methuselah.
22 And after he became the father of
Methuselah, Enoch walked with God 300 years and had other sons and daughters.
23 Altogether, Enoch lived 365 years.
24 Enoch walked with God; then he was
no more, because God took him away.
25 When Methuselah had lived 187 years,
he became the father of Lamech.
26 And after he became the father of Lamech, Methuselah lived 782 years and had
other sons and daughters.


27 Altogether, Methuselah lived 969 years, and then he died.
28 When Lamech had lived 182 years, he had a son.

29 He named him Noah and said, "He will comfort us in the labor and painful toil
o our hands caused by the ground the
Lord has cursed."
30 After Noah was born, Lamech lived 595 years and had other sons and daughters.
31 Altogether, Lamech lived 777 years, and then he died.
32 After Noah was 500 years old, he became the father of Shem, Ham and Japheth.

6When men began to increase in
number on the earth and daughters were born to them,
2 the sons of God saw that the daughters of men were beautiful, and they married
any of them they chose.
3 Then the Lord said, "My Spirit will not contend with man forever, for he is
mortal ; his days will be a hundred and twenty years."
4 The Nephilim were on the earth in those days-and also afterward-when the sons
of God went to the daughters of men and had children by them. They were the
heroes of old, men of renown.


5 The Lord saw how great man's wickedness on the earth had become, and that
every inclination of the thoughts
of his heart was only evil all the time.
6 The Lord was grieved that he had
made man on the earth, and his heart f was filled with pain.
7 So the Lord said, "I will wipe mankind, whom I have created, from the face of
the earth-men and animals, and creatures that move along the ground, and birds
of the air-for I am grieved that I have made them."
8 But Noah found favor in the eyes of the Lord .
9 This is the account of Noah. Noah was a righteous man, blameless among the
people of his time, and he walked with God. 10 Noah had three sons: Shem, Ham
and Japheth.
11 Now the earth was corrupt in God's sight and was full of violence.
12 God saw how corrupt the earth had become, for all the people on earth had
corrupted their ways.
13 So God said to Noah, "I am going to put an end to all people, for the earth
is filled with violence because of them. I am surely going to destroy both them
and the earth.
14 So make yourself an ark of cypress wood; make rooms in it and coat it with
pitch inside and out.


15 This is how you are to build it: The ark is to be 450 feet long, 75 feet wide
and 45 feet high.
16 Make a roof for it and finish the ark to
within 18 inches of the top. Put a door in the side of the ark and make lower,
middle and upper decks.
17 I am going to bring floodwaters on the earth to destroy all life under the
heavens, every creature that has the breath of life in it. Everything on earth
will perish.

18 But I will establish my covenant with you, and you will enter the ark-you and
your sons and your wife and your sons'
wives with you. 19 You are to bring into the ark two of all
living creatures, male and female, to keep them alive with you. 20 Two of every
kind of bird, of every kind
of animal and of every kind of creature that moves along the ground will come to
you to be kept alive.
21
You are to take every kind of food that is to be eaten and store it away as food
for you and for them."
22
Noah did everything just as God commanded him.


7The Lord then said to Noah, "Go into the ark, you and your whole family,
because I have found you righteous in this generation.


2 Take with you seven of every kind of clean animal, a male and its mate, and
two of every kind of unclean animal, a male and its mate,

3 and also seven of every kind of bird, male and female, to keep their various
kinds alive throughout the earth.
4 Seven days from now I will send rain on the earth for forty days and forty
nights, and I will wipe from the face of the earth every living creature I have
made."
5 And Noah did all that the Lord
commanded him.
6 Noah was six hundred years old when the floodwaters came on the earth.
7 And Noah and his sons and his wife and his sons' wives entered the ark to
escape the waters of the flood.
8 Pairs of clean and unclean animals, of birds and of all creatures that move
along the ground,
9
male and female, came to Noah and entered the ark, as God had commanded Noah.
10
And after the seven days the floodwaters came on the earth.
11 In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, on the seventeenth day of the
second month-on that day all the springs of the great deep burst forth, and the
floodgates of the heavens were opened.
12 And rain fell on the earth forty days and forty nights.


13 On that very day Noah and his sons, Shem, Ham and Japheth, together with his
wife and the wives of his three sons, entered the ark.

14 They had with them every wild animal according to its kind, all livestock
according to their kinds, every creature that moves along the ground according
to its kind and every bird according to its kind, everything with wings.

15 Pairs of all creatures that have the breath of life in them came to Noah and
entered the ark. 16 The animals going in were male and female of every living
thing, as God had commanded Noah. Then the Lord shut him in.
17 For forty days the flood kept coming on the earth, and as the waters
increased they lifted the ark high above the earth.
18 The waters rose and increased greatly on the earth, and the ark floated on
the surface of the water.
19 They rose greatly on the earth, and all the high mountains under the entire
heavens were covered.
20 The waters rose and covered the mountains to a depth of more than twenty
feet. , 21 Every living thing that moved on the
earth perished-birds, livestock, wild animals, all the creatures that swarm over
the earth, and all mankind.


22 Everything on dry land that had the breath of life in its nostrils died.
23 Every living thing on the face of the earth was wiped out; men and animals
and the creatures that move along the ground and the birds of the air were wiped
from the earth. Only Noah was left, and those with him in the ark.
24 The waters flooded the earth for a hundred and fifty days.


8But God remembered Noah and all the wild animals and the livestock that were
with him in the ark, and he sent a wind over the earth, and the waters receded.
2 Now the springs of the deep and the floodgates of the heavens had been closed,
and the rain had stopped falling from the sky.
3 The water receded steadily from the earth. At the end of the hundred and fifty
days the water had gone down,
4 and on the seventeenth day of the seventh month the ark came to rest on the
mountains of Ararat.
5 The waters continued to recede until the tenth month, and on the first day of
the tenth month the tops of the mountains became visible.
6 After forty days Noah opened the window he had made in the ark


7 and sent out a raven, and it kept flying back and forth until the water had
dried up from the earth.
8 Then he sent out a dove to see if the water had receded from the surface of
the ground.

9 But the dove could find no place to set its feet because there was water over
all
the surface of the earth; so it returned t Noah in the ark. He reached out his
hand and took the dove and brought it back to himself in the ark.
10 He waited seven more days and again
sent out the dove from the ark.
11 When the dove returned to him in the evening, there in its beak was a freshly
plucked olive leaf! Then Noah knew that
the water had receded from the earth.
12 He waited seven more days and sent the dove out again, but this time it did
not return to him.
13 By the first day of the first month of Noah's six hundred and first year, the
water had dried up from the earth. Noah then removed the covering from the ark
and saw that the surface of the ground was dry.
14 By the twenty-seventh day of the second month the earth was completely dry.
15 Then God said to Noah,

16 "Come out of the ark, you and your wife and your sons and their wives.


17 Bring out every kind of living creature that is with you-the birds, the
animals, and all the creatures that move along the ground-so they can multiply
on the
earth and be fruitful and increase in number upon it."
18 So Noah came out, together with his
sons and his wife and his sons' wives.
19 o All the animals and all the creatures that move along the ground and all
the birds-everything that moves on the earth-came out of the ark, one kind after
another.

20 Then Noah built an altar to the Lord and, taking some of all the clean
animals and clean birds, he sacrificed burnt offerings on it.
21 The Lord smelled the pleasing aroma and said in his heart: "Never again will
I
curse the ground because of man, even though every inclination of his heart is
evil from childhood. And never again will I destroy all living creatures, as I
have done.
22 "As long as the earth endures, seedtime and harvest, cold and heat, summer
and winter, day and night will never cease."


9Then God blessed Noah and his sons, saying to them, "Be fruitful and increase
in number and fill the earth.

2 The fear and dread of you will fall upon
all the beasts of the earth and all the birds of the air, upon every creature
that moves along the ground, and upon all


the fish of the sea; they are given into your hands.
3 Everything that lives and moves will be food for you. Just as I gave you the
green plants, I now give you everything.
4 "But you must not eat meat that has its lifeblood still in it.
5 And for your lifeblood I will surely demand an accounting. I will demand an
accounting from every animal. And from each man, too, I will demand an
accounting for the life of his fellow man.

6 "Whoever sheds the blood of man, by man shall his blood be shed; for in the
image of God has God made man.
7 As for you, be fruitful and increase in
number; multiply on the earth and increase upon it."
8 Then God said to Noah and to his sons
with him:
9 "I now establish my covenant with you and with your descendants after you

10 and with every living creature that was with you-the birds, the livestock and
all the wild animals, all those that came out
of the ark with you-every living creature on earth.
11 I establish my covenant with you: Never again will all life be cut off by the
waters of a flood; never again will there be a flood to destroy the earth."

12 And God said, "This is the sign of the covenant I am making between me and


you and every living creature with you, a covenant for all generations to come:
13 I have set my rainbow in the clouds, and it will be the sign of the covenant
between me and the earth.
14 Whenever I bring clouds over the earth and the rainbow appears in the clouds,
15 I will remember my covenant between me and you and all living creatures of
every kind. Never again will the waters become a flood to destroy all life.
16 Whenever the rainbow appears in the
clouds, I will see it and remember the everlasting covenant between God and all
living creatures of every kind on the earth."

17 So God said to Noah, "This is the sign of the covenant I have established
between me and all life on the earth."

18 The sons of Noah who came out of the ark were Shem, Ham and Japheth.
(Ham was the father of Canaan.)
19 These were the three sons of Noah,
and from them came the people who were scattered over the earth.
20 Noah, a man of the soil, proceeded to plant a vineyard.
21 When he drank some of its wine, he became drunk and lay uncovered inside his
tent.
22 Ham, the father of Canaan, saw his
father's nakedness and told his two brothers outside.


23 But Shem and Japheth took a garment and laid it across their shoulders; then
they walked in backward and covered their father's nakedness. Their faces
were turned the other way so that they would not see their father's nakedness.
24 When Noah awoke from his wine and found out what his youngest son had
done to him, 25 he said, "Cursed be Canaan! The
lowest of slaves will he be to his brothers." 26 He also said, "Blessed be the
Lord ,
the God of Shem! May Canaan be the slave of Shem.
27
May God extend the territory of Japheth ; may Japheth live in the tents of Shem,
and may Canaan be his slave."
28
After the flood Noah lived 350 years. 29 Altogether, Noah lived 950 years, and
then he died.

10This is the account of Shem, Ham
and Japheth, Noah's sons, who themselves had sons after the flood.
The Japhethites
2 The sons of Japheth: Gomer, Magog,
Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech and Tiras.
3 The sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, Riphath and Togarmah.


4 The sons of Javan: Elishah, Tarshish, the Kittim and the Rodanim.
5 (From these the maritime peoples spread out into their territories by their
clans within their nations, each with its own language.) The Hamites

6 The sons of Ham: Cush, Mizraim, Put and Canaan.
7 The sons of Cush: Seba, Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah and Sabteca. The sons of
Raamah: Sheba and Dedan.
8 Cush was the father of Nimrod, who grew to be a mighty warrior on the earth.
9
He was a mighty hunter before the Lord ; that is why it is said, "Like Nimrod, a
mighty hunter before the Lord ."
10 The first centers of his kingdom were
Babylon, Erech, Akkad and Calneh, in Shinar.
11 From that land he went to Assyria, where he built Nineveh, Rehoboth Ir, Calah
12 and Resen, which is between Nineveh and Calah; that is the great city.
13 Mizraim was the father of the Ludites, Anamites, Lehabites, Naphtuhites,

14 Pathrusites, Casluhites (from whom the Philistines came) and Caphtorites.
15 Canaan was the father of Sidon his firstborn, and of the Hittites,


16 Jebusites, Amorites, Girgashites,
17 Hivites, Arkites, Sinites,

18 Arvadites, Zemarites and Hamathites. Later the Canaanite clans scattered

19 and the borders of Canaan reached from Sidon toward Gerar as far as Gaza, and
then toward Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboiim, as far as Lasha.

20 These are the sons of Ham by their clans and languages, in their territorie
and nations. The Semites
21 Sons were also born to Shem, whose older brother was Japheth; Shem was the
ancestor of all the sons of Eber.
22 The sons of Shem: Elam, Asshur, Arphaxad, Lud and Aram.

23 The sons of Aram: Uz, Hul, Gether and Meshech.

24 Arphaxad was the father of Shelah, and Shelah the father of Eber.
25 Two sons were born to Eber: One was named Peleg, because in his time the
earth was divided; his brother was named Joktan.
26 Joktan was the father of Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah,

27 Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah,
28 Obal, Abimael, Sheba,


29 Ophir, Havilah and Jobab. All these were sons of Joktan.

30 The region where they lived stretched
from Mesha toward Sephar, in the eastern hill country.
31
These are the sons of Shem by their clans and languages, in their territories
and nations.
32 These are the clans of Noah's sons,
according to their lines of descent, s within their nations. From these the
nations spread out over the earth after the flood.


11Now the whole world had one language and a common speech.

2 As men moved eastward, they found a plain in Shinar and settled there.

3 They said to each other, "Come, let's make bricks and bake them thoroughly."
They used brick instead of stone, and tar for mortar.
4 Then they said, "Come, let us build ourselves a city, with a tower that
reaches to the heavens, so that we may make a name for ourselves and not be
scattered over the face of the whole
earth."
5 But the Lord came down to see the city
and the tower that the men were building.
6 The Lord said, "If as one people speaking the same language they have


begun to do this, then nothing they plan to do will be impossible for them.
7 Come, let us go down and confuse their
language so they will not understand each other."
8 So the Lord scattered them from there over all the earth, and they stopped
building the city.
9 That is why it was called Babel - because there the Lord confused the language
of the whole world. From there the Lord scattered them over the face of
the whole earth.
10 This is the account of Shem. Two years after the flood, when Shem was
100 years old, he became the father of Arphaxad.
11
And after he became the father of Arphaxad, Shem lived 500 years and had other
sons and daughters.
12
When Arphaxad had lived 35 years, he became the father of Shelah.
13
And after he became the father of Shelah, Arphaxad lived 403 years and had other
sons and daughters.
14
When Shelah had lived 30 years, he became the father of Eber. 15 And after he
became the father of
Eber, Shelah lived 403 years and had other sons and daughters.
16 When Eber had lived 34 years, he became the father of Peleg.


17 And after he became the father of Peleg, Eber lived 430 years and had other
sons and daughters.

18 When Peleg had lived 30 years, he became the father of Reu.
19 And after he became the father of Reu, Peleg lived 209 years and had other
sons and daughters.
20 When Reu had lived 32 years, he became the father of Serug.
21 And after he became the father of Serug, Reu lived 207 years and had other
sons and daughters.

22 When Serug had lived 30 years, he became the father of Nahor.
23
And after he became the father of Nahor, Serug lived 200 years and had other
sons and daughters.
24
When Nahor had lived 29 years, he became the father of Terah.
25
And after he became the father of Terah, Nahor lived 119 years and had other
sons and daughters.
26
After Terah had lived 70 years, he became the father of Abram, Nahor and Haran.
27 This is the account of Terah. Terah became the father of Abram, Nahor and
Haran. And Haran became the father of Lot.


28 While his father Terah was still alive, Haran died in Ur of the Chaldeans, in
the land of his birth.
29 Abram and Nahor both married. The name of Abram's wife was Sarai, and the
name of Nahor's wife was Milcah;
she was the daughter of Haran, the father of both Milcah and Iscah.
30 Now Sarai was barren; she had no children.

31 Terah took his son Abram, his grandson Lot son of Haran, and his daughter-in-
law Sarai, the wife of his son Abram, and together they set out
from Ur of the Chaldeans to go to Canaan. But when they came to Haran, they
settled there.
32 Terah lived 205 years, and he died in Haran.


12The Lord had said to Abram,
"Leave your country, your people and your father's household and go to the land
I will show you.
2 "I will make you into a great nation and I will bless you; I will make your
name great, and you will be a blessing.
3 I will bless those who bless you, and whoever curses you I will curse; and all
peoples on earth will be blessed through you."

4 So Abram left, as the Lord had told him; and Lot went with him. Abram was
seventy-five years old when he set out from Haran.


5 He took his wife Sarai, his nephew Lot, all the possessions they had
accumulated and the people they had acquired in Haran, and they set out for
the land of Canaan, and they arrived there.
6 Abram traveled through the land as far as the site of the great tree of Moreh
at Shechem. At that time the Canaanites
were in the land.
7 The Lord appeared to Abram and said,
"To your offspring I will give this land." So he built an altar there to the
Lord , who had appeared to him.
8 From there he went on toward the hills east of Bethel and pitched his tent,
with Bethel on the west and Ai on the east. There he built an altar to the Lord
and
called on the name of the Lord .
9 Then Abram set out and continued toward the Negev. 10 Now there was a famine
in the land,
and Abram went down to Egypt to live there for a while because the famine was
severe.
11 As he was about to enter Egypt, he said to his wife Sarai, "I know what a
beautiful woman you are.
12 When the Egyptians see you, they will say, 'This is his wife.' Then they will
kill me but will let you live.
13
Say you are my sister, so that I will be treated well for your sake and my life
will be spared because of you."


14 When Abram came to Egypt, the Egyptians saw that she was a very beautiful
woman.
15 And when Pharaoh's officials saw her, they praised her to Pharaoh, and she
was taken into his palace.
16 He treated Abram well for her sake, and Abram acquired sheep and cattle, male
and female donkeys, menservants and maidservants, and camels.
17 But the Lord inflicted serious diseases on Pharaoh and his household because
of Abram's wife Sarai.
18 So Pharaoh summoned Abram. "What
have you done to me?" he said. "Why didn't you tell me she was your wife?
19 Why did you say, 'She is my sister,' so that I took her to be my wife? Now
then,
here is your wife. Take her and go!"
20 Then Pharaoh gave orders about Abram to his men, and they sent him on his
way, with his wife and everything he
had.

13So Abram went up from Egypt to
the Negev, with his wife and everything he had, and Lot went with him.
2 Abram had become very wealthy in livestock and in silver and gold. 3 From the
Negev he went from place to
place until he came to Bethel, to the place between Bethel and Ai where his tent
had been earlier


4 and where he had first built an altar. There Abram called on the name of the
Lord .
5 Now Lot, who was moving about with Abram, also had flocks and herds and tents.
6 But the land could not support them while they stayed together, for their
possessions were so great that they were not able to stay together.
7 And quarreling arose between Abram's herdsmen and the herdsmen of Lot. The
Canaanites and Perizzites were also living in the land at that time.

8 So Abram said to Lot, "Let's not have any quarreling between you and me, or
between your herdsmen and mine, for
we are brothers.
9 Is not the whole land before you? Let's part company. If you go to the left,
I'll go
to the right; if you go to the right, I'll go to the left."
10 Lot looked up and saw that the whole plain of the Jordan was well watered,
like the garden of the Lord , like the land of Egypt, toward Zoar. (This was
before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah.)
11 So Lot chose for himself the whole plain of the Jordan and set out toward the
east. The two men parted company:
12 Abram lived in the land of Canaan, while Lot lived among the cities of the
plain and pitched his tents near Sodom.


13 Now the men of Sodom were wicked and were sinning greatly against the Lord .
14 The Lord said to Abram after Lot had parted from him, "Lift up your eyes from
where you are and look north and south, east and west.
15 All the land that you see I will give to
you and your offspring forever.
16 I will make your offspring like the dust
of the earth, so that if anyone could count the dust, then your offspring could
be counted.
17 Go, walk through the length and breadth of the land, for I am giving it to
you."
18 So Abram moved his tents and went to live near the great trees of Mamre at
Hebron, where he built an altar to the Lord .


14At this time Amraphel king of
Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Kedorlaomer king of Elam and Tidal king of Goiim
2 went to war against Bera king of Sodom, Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king
of Admah, Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (that is, Zoar).
3 All these latter kings joined forces in the Valley of Siddim (the Salt Sea ).


4 For twelve years they had been subject to Kedorlaomer, but in the thirteenth
year they rebelled.
5 In the fourteenth year, Kedorlaomer and the kings allied with him went out and
defeated the Rephaites in Ashteroth Karnaim, the Zuzites in Ham, the Emites in
Shaveh Kiriathaim

6 and the Horites in the hill country of Seir, as far as El Paran near the
desert.

7 Then they turned back and went to En Mishpat (that is, Kadesh), and they
conquered the whole territory of the Amalekites, as well as the Amorites who
were living in Hazazon Tamar.
8 Then the king of Sodom, the king of Gomorrah, the king of Admah, the king
of Zeboiim and the king of Bela (that is, Zoar) marched out and drew up their
battle lines in the Valley of Siddim
9 against Kedorlaomer king of Elam, Tidal king of Goiim, Amraphel king of Shinar
and Arioch king of Ellasar-four kings against five.
10 Now the Valley of Siddim was full of tar pits, and when the kings of Sodom
and Gomorrah fled, some of the men fell into them and the rest fled to the
hills.
11 The four kings seized all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah and all their food;
then they went away.
12 They also carried off Abram's nephew Lot and his possessions, since he was
living in Sodom.


13 One who had escaped came and reported this to Abram the Hebrew. Now Abram was
living near the great trees of Mamre the Amorite, a brother of Eshcol and Aner,
all of whom were allied with
Abram.
14 When Abram heard that his relative had been taken captive, he called out the
318 trained men born in his
household and went in pursuit as far as Dan.
15 During the night Abram divided his men to attack them and he routed them,
pursuing them as far as Hobah, north of Damascus.
16 He recovered all the goods and brought back his relative Lot and his
possessions, together with the women and the other people. 17 After Abram
returned from defeating Kedorlaomer and the kings allied with him, the king of
Sodom came out to meet him in the Valley of Shaveh (that is the King's Valley).
18 Then Melchizedek king of Salem brought out bread and wine. He was priest of
God Most High,
19 and he blessed Abram, saying, "Blessed be Abram by God Most High, Creator of
heaven and earth.
20 And blessed be God Most High, who delivered your enemies into your hand."
Then Abram gave him a tenth of everything.


21 The king of Sodom said to Abram, "Give me the people and keep the goods for
yourself."
22 But Abram said to the king of Sodom, "I have raised my hand to the Lord , God
Most High, Creator of heaven and earth,
and have taken an oath
23 that I will accept nothing belonging to you, not even a thread or the thong
of a sandal, so that you will never be able to say, 'I made Abram rich.'

24 I will accept nothing but what my men have eaten and the share that belongs
to the men who went with me-to Aner, Eshcol and Mamre. Let them have their
share."

15 After this, the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision: "Do not be
afraid, Abram. I am your shield, your very great reward. "
, 2 But Abram said, "O Sovereign Lord , what can you give me since I remain
childless and the one who will inherit my estate is Eliezer of Damascus?"
3 And Abram said, "You have given me no children; so a servant in my household
will be my heir."
4 Then the word of the Lord came to him: "This man will not be your heir, but a
son coming from your own body will be your heir."
5 He took him outside and said, "Look up at the heavens and count the stars-if


indeed you can count them." Then he said to him, "So shall your offspring be."
6 Abram believed the Lord , and he credited it to him as righteousness.
7 He also said to him, "I am the Lord , who brought you out of Ur of the
Chaldeans to give you this land to take possession of it."
8 But Abram said, "O Sovereign Lord , how can I know that I will gain
possession of it?"
9 So the Lord said to him, "Bring me a heifer, a goat and a ram, each three
years old, along with a dove and a young pigeon."

10 Abram brought all these to him, cut them in two and arranged the halves
opposite each other; the birds, however, he did not cut in half.

11 Then birds of prey came down on the carcasses, but Abram drove them away.
12 As the sun was setting, Abram fell into a deep sleep, and a thick and
dreadful

darkness came over him. 13 Then the Lord said to him, "Know for
certain that your descendants will be strangers in a country not their own, and
they will be enslaved and mistreated four hundred years. 14 But I will punish
the nation they serve
as slaves, and afterward they will come out with great possessions.


15 You, however, will go to your fathers in peace and be buried at a good old
age.
16 In the fourth generation your descendants will come back here, for the sin of
the Amorites has not yet
reached its full measure."
17 When the sun had set and darkness had fallen, a smoking firepot with a
blazing torch appeared and passed
between the pieces.
18 On that day the Lord made a covenant with Abram and said, "To your
descendants I give this land, from the river of Egypt to the great river, the
Euphrates-
19 the land of the Kenites, Kenizzites,
Kadmonites,
20 Hittites, Perizzites, Rephaites,
21 Amorites, Canaanites, Girgashites and
Jebusites."




16 Now Sarai, Abram's wife, had borne him no children. But she had an Egyptian
maidservant named Hagar;
2 so she said to Abram, "The Lord has kept me from having children. Go, sleep
with my maidservant; perhaps I can build a family through her." Abram agreed to
what Sarai said.
3 So after Abram had been living in Canaan ten years, Sarai his wife took her
Egyptian maidservant Hagar and gave her to her husband to be his wife.


4 He slept with Hagar, and she conceived. When she knew she was pregnant, she
began to despise her mistress.
5 Then Sarai said to Abram, "You are
responsible for the wrong I am suffering. I put my servant in your arms, and now
that she knows she is pregnant, she despises me. May the Lord judge between you
and me."

6 "Your servant is in your hands," Abram said. "Do with her whatever you think
best." Then Sarai mistreated Hagar; so
she fled from her. 7 The angel of the Lord found Hagar near a spring in the
desert; it was the spring that is beside the road to Shur.

8 And he said, "Hagar, servant of Sarai, where have you come from, and where are
you going?" "I'm running away from my mistress Sarai," she answered.
9 Then the angel of the Lord told her, "Go back to your mistress and submit to
her."
10 The angel added, "I will so increase your descendants that they will be too
numerous to count."
11 The angel of the Lord also said to her: "You are now with child and you will
have a son. You shall name him Ishmael, for the Lord has heard of your misery.
12 He will be a wild donkey of a man; his hand will be against everyone and
everyone's hand against him, and he will live in hostility toward all his
brothers."


13 She gave this name to the Lord who spoke to her: "You are the God who sees
me," for she said, "I have now seen the One who sees me."

14 That is why the well was called Beer Lahai Roi ; it is still there, between
Kadesh and Bered.
15 So Hagar bore Abram a son, and Abram gave the name Ishmael to the
son she had borne.
16 Abram was eighty-six years old when Hagar bore him Ishmael.



17When Abram was ninety-nine years old, the Lord appeared to him and said, "I am
God Almighty ; walk before me and be blameless.
2 I will confirm my covenant between me and you and will greatly increase your
numbers."
3 Abram fell facedown, and God said to him,
4 "As for me, this is my covenant with you: You will be the father of many
nations.
5 No longer will you be called Abram ; your name will be Abraham, for I have
made you a father of many nations. 6 I will make you very fruitful; I will make
nations of you, and kings will come from you.


7 I will establish my covenant as an everlasting covenant between me and you and
your descendants after you for the generations to come, to be your God and the
God of your descendants after
you.
8 The whole land of Canaan, where you are now an alien, I will give as an
everlasting possession to you and your
descendants after you; and I will be thei God."
9 Then God said to Abraham, "As for you, you must keep my covenant, you and
your descendants after you for the generations to come.
10
This is my covenant with you and your descendants after you, the covenant you
are to keep: Every male among you shall be circumcised. 11 You are to undergo
circumcision, and
it will be the sign of the covenant between me and you.
12 For the generations to come every male among you who is eight days old must
be circumcised, including those born in your household or bought with
money from a foreigner-those who are not your offspring. 13 Whether born in your
household or
bought with your money, they must be circumcised. My covenant in your flesh is
to be an everlasting covenant.
14
Any uncircumcised male, who has not been circumcised in the flesh, will be cu
off from his people; he has broken my covenant."


15 God also said to Abraham, "As for Sarai your wife, you are no longer to call
her Sarai; her name will be Sarah.
16 I will bless her and will surely give you a son by her. I will bless her so
that she will be the mother of nations; kings of
peoples will come from her."
17 Abraham fell facedown; he laughed r and said to himself, "Will a son be born
to a man a hundred years old? Will Sarah bear a child at the age of ninety?"

18 And Abraham said to God, "If only Ishmael might live under your blessing!"
19
Then God said, "Yes, but your wife Sarah will bear you a son, and you will call
him Isaac. I will establish my covenant with him as an everlasting covenant for
his descendants after him.
20 And as for Ishmael, I have heard you: I will surely bless him; I will make
him fruitful and will greatly increase his numbers. He will be the father of
twelve
rulers, and I will make him into a great nation.
21 But my covenant I will establish with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear to you by
this time next year."
22 When he had finished speaking with Abraham, God went up from him.
23 On that very day Abraham took his
son Ishmael and all those born in his household or bought with his money, t
every male in his household, and circumcised them, as God told him.


24 Abraham was ninety-nine years old when he was circumcised,
25 and his son Ishmael was thirteen;

26 Abraham and his son Ishmael were both circumcised on that same day.
27 And every male in Abraham's household, including those born in his household
or bought from a foreigner, was circumcised with him.


18 The Lord appeared to Abraham
near the great trees of Mamre while he was sitting at the entrance to his tent
in the heat of the day.
2 Abraham looked up and saw three men standing nearby. When he saw them, he
hurried from the entrance of his tent to meet them and bowed low to the ground.
3 He said, "If I have found favor in your eyes, my lord, do not pass your
servant by.
4 Let a little water be brought, and then you may all wash your feet and rest
under this tree.
5 Let me get you something to eat, so you can be refreshed and then go on your
way-now that you have come to your servant." "Very well," they answered, "do as
you say."
6 So Abraham hurried into the tent to Sarah. "Quick," he said, "get three seahs
of fine flour and knead it and bake some bread."


7 Then he ran to the herd and selected a choice, tender calf and gave it to a
servant, who hurried to prepare it.

8 He then brought some curds and milk
and the calf that had been prepared, and set these before them. While they ate,
he stood near them under a tree.
9 "Where is your wife Sarah?" they asked him. "There, in the tent," he said.
10 Then the Lord said, "I will surely return to you about this time next year,
and Sarah your wife will have a son." Now Sarah was listening at the entrance to
the tent, which was behind him.
11 Abraham and Sarah were already old and well advanced in years, and Sarah was
past the age of childbearing.
12 So Sarah laughed to herself as she thought, "After I am worn out and my
master is old, will I now have this pleasure?"
13 Then the Lord said to Abraham, "Why did Sarah laugh and say, 'Will I really
have a child, now that I am old?'
14 Is anything too hard for the Lord ? I will return to you at the appointed
time next year and Sarah will have a son."
15 Sarah was afraid, so she lied and said, "I did not laugh." But he said, "Yes,
you did laugh."
16 When the men got up to leave, they looked down toward Sodom, and Abraham
walked along with them to see them on their way.


17 Then the Lord said, "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am about to do?
18 Abraham will surely become a great
and powerful nation, and all nations on earth will be blessed through him.
19 For I have chosen him, so that he will direct his children and his household
after him to keep the way of the Lord by doing what is right and just, so that
the Lord will bring about for Abraham what he has promised him."
20 Then the Lord said, "The outcry
against Sodom and Gomorrah is so great and their sin so grievous
21 that I will go down and see if what they
have done is as bad as the outcry that has reached me. If not, I will know."
22 The men turned away and went toward Sodom, but Abraham remained
standing before the Lord .
23 Then Abraham approached him and said: "Will you sweep away the righteous with
the wicked?

24 What if there are fifty righteous people in the city? Will you really sweep
it away and not spare the place for the sake of the fifty righteous people in
it?
25 Far be it from you to do such a thing-to kill the righteous with the wicked,
treating the righteous and the wicked alike. Far be it from you! Will not the
Judge of all the earth do right?"


26 The Lord said, "If I find fifty righteous people in the city of Sodom, I will
spare the whole place for their sake."

27 Then Abraham spoke up again: "Now that I have been so bold as to speak to the
Lord, though I am nothing but dust
and ashes,
28 what if the number of the righteous is five less than fifty? Will you destroy
the whole city because of five people?" "If I find forty-five there," he said,
"I will not destroy it."

29 Once again he spoke to him, "What if only forty are found there?" He said,
"For the sake of forty, I will not do it."

30 Then he said, "May the Lord not be angry, but let me speak. What if only
thirty can be found there?" He answered,
"I will not do it if I find thirty there."
31 Abraham said, "Now that I have been so bold as to speak to the Lord, what if
only twenty can be found there?" He said, "For the sake of twenty, I will not
destroy it."
32
Then he said, "May the Lord not be angry, but let me speak just once more. What
if only ten can be found there?" He answered, "For the sake of ten, I will not
destroy it."
33 When the Lord had finished speaking with Abraham, he left, and Abraham
returned home.

19 The two angels arrived at Sodom in the evening, and Lot was sitting in the


gateway of the city. When he saw them, he got up to meet them and bowed down
with his face to the ground.

2 "My lords," he said, "please turn aside to your servant's house. You can wash
your feet and spend the night and then go on your way early in the morning."
"No," they answered, "we will spend the night in the square."
3 But he insisted so strongly that they did go with him and entered his house.
He
prepared a meal for them, baking bread without yeast, and they ate.
4 Before they had gone to bed, all the men from every part of the city of Sodom-
both young and old-surrounded
the house.
5 They called to Lot, "Where are the men who came to you tonight? Bring them out
to us so that we can have sex with
them."
6 Lot went outside to meet them and shut the door behind him
7 and said, "No, my friends. Don't do this
wicked thing.
8 Look, I have two daughters who have never slept with a man. Let me bring them
out to you, and you can do what you like with them. But don't do anything
to these men, for they have come under the protection of my roof."
9 "Get out of our way," they replied. And they said, "This fellow came here as
an alien, and now he wants to play the judge! We'll treat you worse than them."


They kept bringing pressure on Lot and moved forward to break down the door.
10 But the men inside reached out and
pulled Lot back into the house and shut the door.
11 Then they struck the men who were at the door of the house, young and old,
with blindness so that they could not find the door.

12 The two men said to Lot, "Do you have anyone else here-sons-in-law, sons or
daughters, or anyone else in the city who belongs to you? Get them out of
here,
13 because we are going to destroy this place. The outcry to the Lord against
its people is so great that he has sent us to
destroy it."
14 So Lot went out and spoke to his sons- in-law, who were pledged to marry his
daughters. He said, "Hurry and get out
of this place, because the Lord is about to destroy the city!" But his sons-in-
law thought he was joking.

15 With the coming of dawn, the angels urged Lot, saying, "Hurry! Take your
wife and your two daughters who are here, or you will be swept away when the
city is punished."
16 When he hesitated, the men grasped his hand and the hands of his wife and of
his two daughters and led them safely
out of the city, for the Lord was merciful to them.


17 As soon as they had brought them out, one of them said, "Flee for your lives!
Don't look back, and don't stop anywhere in the plain! Flee to the mountains or
you will be swept away!"

18 But Lot said to them, "No, my lords, please!
19 Your servant has found favor in your eyes, and you have shown great kindness
to me in sparing my life. But I can't flee to the mountains; this disaster will
overtake me, and I'll die.
20 Look, here is a town near enough to run to, and it is small. Let me flee to
it-i is very small, isn't it? Then my life will b spared."
21 He said to him, "Very well, I will grant this request too; I will not
overthrow the town you speak of.
22 But flee there quickly, because I
cannot do anything until you reach it." (That is why the town was called Zoar. )
23 By the time Lot reached Zoar, the sun
had risen over the land.
24 Then the Lord rained down burning sulfur on Sodom and Gomorrah-from the Lord
out of the heavens.

25 Thus he overthrew those cities and the entire plain, including all those
living in the cities-and also the vegetation in the land.
26 But Lot's wife looked back, and she became a pillar of salt.


27 Early the next morning Abraham got up and returned to the place where he had
stood before the Lord .
28 He looked down toward Sodom and Gomorrah, toward all the land of the
plain, and he saw dense smoke rising from the land, like smoke from a furnace.
29 So when God destroyed the cities of the plain, he remembered Abraham, and he
brought Lot out of the catastrophe that overthrew the cities where Lot had
lived.
30 Lot and his two daughters left Zoar t and settled in the mountains, for he
was e afraid to stay in Zoar. He and his two daughters lived in a cave.
31 One day the older daughter said to the younger, "Our father is old, and there
is no man around here to lie with us, as is the custom all over the earth.

32 Let's get our father to drink wine and then lie with him and preserve our
family line through our father."

33 That night they got their father to drink wine, and the older daughter went
in
and lay with him. He was not aware of it when she lay down or when she got up.
34 The next day the older daughter said
to the younger, "Last night I lay with my father. Let's get him to drink wine
again tonight, and you go in and lie with him so we can preserve our family line
through our father."
35 So they got their father to drink wine that night also, and the younger


daughter went and lay with him. Again he was not aware of it when she lay down
or when she got up.
36 So both of Lot's daughters became pregnant by their father.
37 The older daughter had a son, and she named him Moab ; he is the father of
the Moabites of today.

38 The younger daughter also had a son, and she named him Ben-Ammi ; he is the
father of the Ammonites of today.


20Now Abraham moved on from
there into the region of the Negev and lived between Kadesh and Shur. For a
while he stayed in Gerar, 2 and there Abraham said of his wife
Sarah, "She is my sister." Then Abimelech king of Gerar sent for Sarah and took
her.
3 But God came to Abimelech in a dream one night and said to him, "You are as
good as dead because of the woman you have taken; she is a married woman."
4 Now Abimelech had not gone near her, so he said, "Lord, will you destroy an
innocent nation?
5 Did he not say to me, 'She is my sister, and didn't she also say, 'He is my
brother'? I have done this with a clear conscience and clean hands."
6 Then God said to him in the dream, "Yes, I know you did this with a clear


conscience, and so I have kept you from sinning against me. That is why I did
not let you touch her.
7 Now return the man's wife, for he is a prophet, and he will pray for you and
you will live. But if you do not return her,
you may be sure that you and all yours will die."
8 Early the next morning Abimelech
summoned all his officials, and when he told them all that had happened, they
were very much afraid.
9 Then Abimelech called Abraham in and said, "What have you done to us? How have
I wronged you that you have brought such great guilt upon me and my kingdom? You
have done things to me that should not be done."
10 And Abimelech asked Abraham, "What was your reason for doing this?"
11 Abraham replied, "I said to myself, 'There is surely no fear of God in this
place, and they will kill me because of my wife.'
12 Besides, she really is my sister, the daughter of my father though not of my
mother; and she became my wife.
13 And when God had me wander from my father's household, I said to her, 'This
is how you can show your love to ' me: Everywhere we go, say of me, "He is my
brother." ' "
14 Then Abimelech brought sheep and cattle and male and female slaves and


gave them to Abraham, and he returned Sarah his wife to him.
15 And Abimelech said, "My land is
before you; live wherever you like."
16 To Sarah he said, "I am giving your brother a thousand shekels of silver.
This is to cover the offense against you
before all who are with you; you are completely vindicated."
17 Then Abraham prayed to God, and
God healed Abimelech, his wife and his slave girls so they could have children
again,
18 for the Lord had closed up every womb in Abimelech's household because of
Abraham's wife Sarah.

21Now the Lord was gracious to

Sarah as he had said, and the Lord did for Sarah what he had promised.
2 Sarah became pregnant and bore a son to Abraham in his old age, at the very
time God had promised him.
3 Abraham gave the name Isaac to the son Sarah bore him.
4 When his son Isaac was eight days old, Abraham circumcised him, as God
commanded him.
5 Abraham was a hundred years old when his son Isaac was born to him.


6 Sarah said, "God has brought me laughter, and everyone who hears about this
will laugh with me."

7 And she added, "Who would have said to Abraham that Sarah would nurse
children? Yet I have borne him a son in his old age."
8 The child grew and was weaned, and on the day Isaac was weaned Abraham held a
great feast.

9 But Sarah saw that the son whom Hagar the Egyptian had borne to Abraham was
mocking,
10 and she said to Abraham, "Get rid of that slave woman and her son, for that
slave woman's son will never share in the inheritance with my son Isaac."
11 The matter distressed Abraham greatly because it concerned his son.
12 But God said to him, "Do not be so
distressed about the boy and your maidservant. Listen to whatever Sarah tells
you, because it is through Isaac that your offspring will be reckoned.
13 I will make the son of the maidservant into a nation also, because he is your
offspring."
14 Early the next morning Abraham took some food and a skin of water and gave
them to Hagar. He set them on her shoulders and then sent her off with the boy.
She went on her way and wandered in the desert of Beersheba.


15 When the water in the skin was gone, she put the boy under one of the bushes.
16 Then she went off and sat down nearby, about a bowshot away, for she thought,
"I cannot watch the boy die."
And as she sat there nearby, she began to sob. 17 God heard the boy crying, and
the
angel of God called to Hagar from heaven and said to her, "What is the matter,
Hagar? Do not be afraid; God has heard the boy crying as he lies
there.
18
Lift the boy up and take him by the hand, for I will make him into a great
nation." 19 Then God opened her eyes and she
saw a well of water. So she went and
filled the skin with water and gave the boy a drink. 20 God was with the boy as
he grew up.
He lived in the desert and became an
archer. 21 While he was living in the Desert of
Paran, his mother got a wife for him from Egypt.
22 At that time Abimelech and Phicol the
commander of his forces said to Abraham, "God is with you in everything you do.
23 Now swear to me here before God that
you will not deal falsely with me or my children or my descendants. Show to
me and the country where you are living


as an alien the same kindness I have shown to you."
24 Abraham said, "I swear it."
25 Then Abraham complained to Abimelech about a well of water that Abimelech's
servants had seized.
26 But Abimelech said, "I don't know who has done this. You did not tell me, and
I heard about it only today."
27 So Abraham brought sheep and cattle
and gave them to Abimelech, and the
two men made a treaty.
28 Abraham set apart seven ewe lambs from the flock,
29 and Abimelech asked Abraham, "What
is the meaning of these seven ewe lambs you have set apart by themselves?"
30 He replied, "Accept these seven lambs
from my hand as a witness that I dug this well."
31 So that place was called Beersheba, because the two men swore an oath
there.
32 After the treaty had been made at Beersheba, Abimelech and Phicol the
commander of his forces returned to the
land of the Philistines.
33 Abraham planted a tamarisk tree in Beersheba, and there he called upon
the name of the Lord , the Eternal God.


34 And Abraham stayed in the land of the Philistines for a long time.


22Some time later God tested
Abraham. He said to him, "Abraham!" "Here I am," he replied.
2 Then God said, "Take your son, your only son, Isaac, whom you love, and go to
the region of Moriah. Sacrifice him there as a burnt offering on one of the
mountains I will tell you about."
3 Early the next morning Abraham got up and saddled his donkey. He took with him
two of his servants and his son Isaac. When he had cut enough wood for the burnt
offering, he set out for the place God had told him about.
4 On the third day Abraham looked up and saw the place in the distance.
5 He said to his servants, "Stay here with the donkey while I and the boy go
over there. We will worship and then we will come back to you."
6 Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering and placed it on his son Isaac,
and he himself carried the fire and the knife. As the two of them went on
together,
7 Isaac spoke up and said to his father Abraham, "Father?" "Yes, my son?"
Abraham replied. "The fire and wood are here," Isaac said, "but where is the
lamb for the burnt offering?"
8 Abraham answered, "God himself will provide the lamb for the burnt offering,


my son." And the two of them went on together.
9 When they reached the place God had told him about, Abraham built an altar
there and arranged the wood on it. He
bound his son Isaac and laid him on the altar, on top of the wood.
10 Then he reached out his hand and took the knife to slay his son. 11 But the
angel of the Lord called out to him from heaven, "Abraham! Abraham!"
"Here I am," he replied. 12 "Do not lay a hand on the boy," he said. "Do not do
anything to him. Now I know that you fear God, because you have not withheld
from me your son, your only son."
13 Abraham looked up and there in a thicket he saw a ram caught by its horns.
He went over and took the ram and sacrificed it as a burnt offering instead of
his son. 14 So Abraham called that place The
Lord Will Provide. And to this day it is said, "On the mountain of the Lord it
will be provided." 15 The angel of the Lord called to Abraham from heaven a
second time
16 and said, "I swear by myself, declares the Lord , that because you have done
this and have not withheld your son, your only son,
17 I will surely bless you and make your descendants as numerous as the stars


in the sky and as the sand on the seashore. Your descendants will take
possession of the cities of their enemies
18 and through your offspring all nations on earth will be blessed, because you
have obeyed me."
19 Then Abraham returned to his servants, and they set off together for
Beersheba. And Abraham stayed in
Beersheba.
20 Some time later Abraham was told, "Milcah is also a mother; she has borne
sons to your brother Nahor:

21 Uz the firstborn, Buz his brother, Kemuel (the father of Aram),
22 Kesed, Hazo, Pildash, Jidlaph and Bethuel."
23 Bethuel became the father of Rebekah. Milcah bore these eight sons to
Abraham's brother Nahor.
24 His concubine, whose name was Reumah, also had sons: Tebah, Gaham, Tahash and
Maacah.


23Sarah lived to be a hundred and
twenty-seven years old. 2 She died at Kiriath Arba (that is,
Hebron) in the land of Canaan, and Abraham went to mourn for Sarah and to weep
over her.


3 Then Abraham rose from beside his dead wife and spoke to the Hittites. He ,
said,
4 "I am an alien and a stranger among you. Sell me some property for a burial
site here so I can bury my dead."
5 The Hittites replied to Abraham,
6 "Sir, listen to us. You are a mighty prince among us. Bury your dead in the
choicest of our tombs. None of us will
refuse you his tomb for burying your dead."
7 Then Abraham rose and bowed down
before the people of the land, the Hittites.
8 He said to them, "If you are willing to let me bury my dead, then listen to me
and intercede with Ephron son of Zohar on
my behalf
9 so he will sell me the cave of Machpelah, which belongs to him and is
at the end of his field. Ask him to sell it to me for the full price as a burial
site among you."
10 Ephron the Hittite was sitting among his people and he replied to Abraham in
the hearing of all the Hittites who had come to the gate of his city.
11 "No, my lord," he said. "Listen to me; I give you the field, and I give you
the cave that is in it. I give it to you in the presence of my people. Bury your
dead."


12 Again Abraham bowed down before the people of the land 13
and he said to Ephron in their hearing, "Listen to me, if you will. I will pay
the price of the field. Accept it from me so I
can bury my dead there." 14
Ephron answered Abraham,
15
"Listen to me, my lord; the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver, but
what is that between me and you? Bury your dead." 16 Abraham agreed to Ephron's
terms and weighed out for him the price he had named in the hearing of the
Hittites: four hundred shekels of silver, according to the weight current among
the
merchants. 17
So Ephron's field in Machpelah near Mamre-both the field and the cave in it, and
all the trees within the borders of the field-was deeded
18
to Abraham as his property in the presence of all the Hittites who had
come to the gate of the city. 19
Afterward Abraham buried his wife Sarah in the cave in the field of Machpelah
near Mamre (which is at Hebron) in the land of Canaan. 20 So the field and the
cave in it were deeded to Abraham by the Hittites as a burial site.


24 Abraham was now old and well
advanced in years, and the Lord had blessed him in every way.
2 He said to the chief servant in his household, the one in charge of all that
he had, "Put your hand under my thigh.
3
I want you to swear by the Lord , the God of heaven and the God of earth, that
you will not get a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites, among
whom I am living, 4 but will go to my country and my own relatives and get a
wife for my son Isaac."
5 The servant asked him, "What if the woman is unwilling to come back with
me to this land? Shall I then take your son back to the country you came from?"
6 "Make sure that you do not take my son
back there," Abraham said.
7 "The Lord , the God of heaven, who brought me out of my father's household
and my native land and who spoke to me and promised me on oath, saying, 'To your
offspring I will give this land'-he will send his angel before you so that you
can get a wife for my son from there. 8 If the woman is unwilling to come back
with you, then you will be released from this oath of mine. Only do not take my
son back there."


9 So the servant put his hand under the thigh of his master Abraham and swore an
oath to him concerning this matter.
10 Then the servant took ten of his master's camels and left, taking with him
all kinds of good things from his master. He set out for Aram Naharaim and made
his way to the town of Nahor.

11 He had the camels kneel down near the well outside the town; it was toward
evening, the time the women go out to
draw water.
12 Then he prayed, "O Lord , God of my master Abraham, give me success today,
and show kindness to my master
Abraham.
13 See, I am standing beside this spring, and the daughters of the townspeople
are coming out to draw water.

14 May it be that when I say to a girl, 'Please let down your jar that I may
have a drink,' and she says, 'Drink, and I'll water your camels too'-let her be
the
one you have chosen for your servant Isaac. By this I will know that you have
shown kindness to my master." 15 Before he had finished praying,
Rebekah came out with her jar on her shoulder. She was the daughter of Bethuel
son of Milcah, who was the wife of Abraham's brother Nahor.
16
The girl was very beautiful, a virgin; no man had ever lain with her. She went
down to the spring, filled her jar and
came up again.


17 The servant hurried to meet her and said, "Please give me a little water from
your jar."
18 "Drink, my lord," she said, and quickly lowered the jar to her hands and gave
him a drink.
19 After she had given him a drink, she said, "I'll draw water for your camels
too,
until they have finished drinking."
20 So she quickly emptied her jar into the trough, ran back to the well to draw
more water, and drew enough for all his
camels.
21 Without saying a word, the man watched her closely to learn whether or not
the Lord had made his journey
successful.
22 When the camels had finished drinking, the man took out a gold nose ring
weighing a beka and two gold bracelets weighing ten shekels.
23 Then he asked, "Whose daughter are you? Please tell me, is there room in your
father's house for us to spend the night?"
24 She answered him, "I am the daughter of Bethuel, the son that Milcah bore to
Nahor."
25 And she added, "We have plenty of
straw and fodder, as well as room for you to spend the night."
26 Then the man bowed down and
worshiped the Lord ,


27 saying, "Praise be to the Lord , the God of my master Abraham, who has not
abandoned his kindness and faithfulness to my master. As for me, the
Lord has led me on the journey to the house of my master's relatives." 28 The
girl ran and told her mother's
household about these things.
29 Now Rebekah had a brother named Laban, and he hurried out to the man at the
spring.

30 As soon as he had seen the nose ring, and the bracelets on his sister's arms,
and had heard Rebekah tell what the man said to her, he went out to the man and
found him standing by the camels
near the spring.
31
"Come, you who are blessed by the Lord ," he said. "Why are you standing out
here? I have prepared the house and a place for the camels."
32
So the man went to the house, and the camels were unloaded. Straw and fodder
were brought for the camels, and water for him and his men to wash their feet.
33
Then food was set before him, but he said, "I will not eat until I have told yo
what I have to say." "Then tell us," Laban said.
34
So he said, "I am Abraham's servant.
35 The Lord has blessed my master abundantly, and he has become wealthy. He has
given him sheep and cattle,


silver and gold, menservants and maidservants, and camels and donkeys.
36 My master's wife Sarah has borne him a son in her old age, and he has given
him everything he owns.
37 And my master made me swear an oath, and said, 'You must not get a wife for
my son from the daughters of the
Canaanites, in whose land I live,
38 but go to my father's family and to my own clan, and get a wife for my son.'

39 "Then I asked my master, 'What if the woman will not come back with me?'
40 "He replied, 'The Lord , before whom I
have walked, will send his angel with
you and make your journey a success, so that you can get a wife for my son from
my own clan and from my father's family.
41
Then, when you go to my clan, you will be released from my oath even if they
refuse to give her to you-you will be released from my oath.'
42 "When I came to the spring today, I
said, 'O Lord , God of my master Abraham, if you will, please grant u success to
the journey on which I have come.
43
See, I am standing beside this spring; if a maiden comes out to draw water and I
say to her, "Please let me drink a
little water from your jar,"
44 and if she says to me, "Drink, and I'll draw water for your camels too," let
her


be the one the Lord has chosen for my master's son.'
45 "Before I finished praying in my heart, Rebekah came out, with her jar on her
shoulder. She went down to the spring
and drew water, and I said to her, 'Please give me a drink.'
46 "She quickly lowered her jar from her shoulder and said, 'Drink, and I'll
water your camels too.' So I drank, and she
watered the camels also.
47 "I asked her, 'Whose daughter are you?' "She said, 'The daughter of
Bethuel son of Nahor, whom Milcah bore to him.' "Then I put the ring in her nose
and the bracelets on her arms,
48 and I bowed down and worshiped the
Lord . I praised the Lord , the God of my master Abraham, who had led me on the
right road to get the granddaughter of my master's brother for his son.

49 Now if you will show kindness and faithfulness to my master, tell me; and if
not, tell me, so I may know which way to
turn."
50 Laban and Bethuel answered, "This is from the Lord ; we can say nothing to
you one way or the other.
51 Here is Rebekah; take her and go, and let her become the wife of your
master's son, as the Lord has directed."

52 When Abraham's servant heard what they said, he bowed down to the ground
before the Lord .


53 Then the servant brought out gold and silver jewelry and articles of clothing
and gave them to Rebekah; he also gave
costly gifts to her brother and to her mother.
54 Then he and the men who were with him ate and drank and spent the night
there. When they got up the next
morning, he said, "Send me on my way to my master."
55 But her brother and her mother replied, "Let the girl remain with us ten days
or
so; then you may go."
56 But he said to them, "Do not detain me, now that the Lord has granted success
to my journey. Send me on my way so I may go to my master."

57 Then they said, "Let's call the girl and ask her about it."
58 So they called Rebekah and asked her, "Will you go with this man?" "I will
go,"
she said.
59 So they sent their sister Rebekah on her way, along with her nurse and
Abraham's servant and his men.

60 And they blessed Rebekah and said to her, "Our sister, may you increase to
thousands upon thousands; may your
offspring possess the gates of their enemies."
61 Then Rebekah and her maids got
ready and mounted their camels and went back with the man. So the servant took
Rebekah and left.


